In this first of the series on Artificial Intelligence in Cancer Clinical Research, it is important to attempt to define the concept of intelligence and the important features we associate with human intelligence. Intelligence is a construct that we associate most notably with human beings and our understanding of human intelligence including perception, cognition, thought, conceptualization, pattern recognition, symbolic processing, creativity, and problem solving. While we acknowledge apparent elements of intelligence in other living species, we most commonly think of intelligence as a manifestation of our conscious awareness and ability to form concepts along with our capacity for symbolic processing, the development of language and ultimately our ability to reason, make decisions and use judgement as we navigate our world (Citation1–4). At the same time, while consciousness and self-awareness seem fundamental and unique to the human experience, these concepts remain profound and elusive mysteries. How can the complex array of atoms and molecules that ultimately behave the physical laws of motion, along with the intricate network of neurons in the central nervous system, give rise to our internal conscious experience and ability to think and reason along with experiences such as joy, sadness, love and beauty? While conceptual processes may be amenable to machine learning (ML), the human intellect is capable of generating new, abstract concepts that further organize his or her environment and, importantly, discover abstract ideas. Such processes provide new insights beyond the actual world and, in a sense, create his or her own world of meaningful symbolic systems with an active curiosity striving for meaning and true understanding of the world around us (Citation2). While a sign represents a characteristic of the external world amenable to algorithmic analysis and mimicking, a symbol evokes an abstract internal response separate from a particular concrete event (Citation2). Human symbolic systems are not only used for communication of cognitive information enabling language but the communication of emotional information. In fact, many of humanity’s most important and highest qualities relate to the development and creative use of symbolic systems resulting in the development of culture, myth, idealism and empathy. While a sign can be thought of as a context free characteristic of an object or situation, a symbol refers to experiences within ourselves. These experiences gain meaning within a context of emotions and interests resulting from the intersection of our prior experience and memory and the present situation to generate feelings or emotions within ourselves as we participate as active contributors to the creation of our world (Citation1).
